---
layout: single
title: Clong
subtitle: First Game of the Challenge
date: 2023-01-31
categories: gamedev
tags: gamedev godot 20-games challenge game-development development coding
header:
  overlay_filter: linear-gradient(0.25turn, rgba(0, 255, 0, 0.7), rgba(0,0,0,0),rgba(0,0,0,0), rgba(0, 0, 255, 0.7))
  overlay_image: /assets/images/posts/clong.png
  caption: Screenshot from Clong on <a href="https://woofenator.itch.io/g1-clong">itch.io</a>
  show_overlay_excerpt: false
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line  MD025-->
# Yet another Pong Clone

Pong was one the earliest arcade video games ever created. Being one of the earliest, it is a simple game. All it takes to recreate it is just a ball, two paddles and some walls for the ball to bounce on. As such, it seems only fitting that this 20 games challenge begins with recreating this milestone of software and hardware engineering.

The decision to tackle this challenge using the Godot game engine - an engine I had never used before - was a chance to learn something new and refreshing in the game engine space. Because it's my first attempt at building anything in GoDot, I skipped reading about best practices and how to tackle challenges the "Correct" way, and instead opted to poke around and find out.

## What is pong

At its core, Pong is mostly a computer physics simulation - the video game. Its two paddles and ball are the only moving parts of the entire screen, and both of those components have very well defined properties of how they move. The ball will move across the screen and bounce from the top and bottom walls, while the paddles will move up and down based on player inputs and deflect the ball depending on where the ball hits the paddle. In essence, the game can be broken down into three different interactions, and all of those involve the ball.

The physics of the Ball and the Paddles are trivial to implement with modern game engines, where they already handle all the bouncing, the material properties of the bounce, the movement of the paddles and everything, requiring very little input from the developer themselves. However, in the spirit of the challenge, and taking my first steps into the godot game engine, I decided to forgo the built-in physics engine to, instead, handle the collisions myself. This does not mean that I didn't use the provided physics body components, but that the movement and interaction of these components was something I coded up myself.

## The Paddles

Kicking the journey off are the paddles. Their basic construction is a sprite and a collider, all of it responding to keyboard inputs. Flexing my drawing skills in 4x4 pixel sprites, I put together two sprites, on for the end of the paddle and one for the middle, and stitched them together in-engine, gave each paddle its own distinct colour and it's off to the races with the look.

For the functionality, godot includes 4 different 2D physics colliders: an Area and either a Kinematic, a Rigid or Static Body. In our case, a static body wouldn't do much good, since it, by design, does not move and is meant to be used for walls. A Rigid or Kinematic body sound like good ideas, however my design required the paddles to reflect the ball in a specific angle depending on where the ball hits the paddle, more on that later. As such, I was left with using an Area, which, in fact, did not actually collide with anything, but rather raises events when a collider enters or exits the area, which I handle in code by adding a listener to the `_on_Paddle_body_entered` event (again, more on that later).

The movement of the paddles I handle in the godot `_physics_process()` subroutine, as it was suggested to handle movement of bodies in here in the documentation for how to handle keybinds. There's not much to say about it, so here's the entire code that handles paddles moving up and down:

```gd
export var paddleSide = ''; # This is set as either `left` or `right` in the editor
export var upEvent = '%s_paddle_up'
export var downEvent = '%s_paddle_down'

export var maxSpeed = 100;
export var maxY = 260;
export var minY = -260;

func _physics_process(delta):
  var speed = 0;
  if Input.is_action_pressed(upEvent % paddleSide):
    speed = delta * -maxSpeed;
  elif Input.is_action_pressed(downEvent % paddleSide):
    speed = delta * maxSpeed;
 
  global_position.y = clamp(global_position.y + speed, minY, maxY)
```
  
## The 🅱all

Next on the chopping block is the ball, arguably the star of the show. The sprite for this is a simple 4x4px cross, but the sprite isn't what makes it the most important component. Its all the interactions that the ball has with the entire rest of the game. It interacts with pretty much anything that is on the screen, and, since I needed special interactions for it, I chose to have the ball be a Kinematic body. This means that the body itself does not move, but is moved through code by settings its velocity. However, it handles collisions no problem, as its velocity is set via the function `move_and_collide`.

The interactions which doesn't require its own section is the ball to the walls interaction. Since Kinematic bodies will move in the direction you tell them to until hitting a wall, in which case they will just slide along the wall without bouncing, I have to handle the interaction with code, so here it is, the entire code that is responsible for the ball bouncing from walls

```gd
func _physics_process(delta):
  var collision = move_and_collide(velocity * delta)
  if collision:
    velocity=velocity.bounce(collision.normal)
```

## When the Ball hits the Paddle

### Ball -> Endzone

- Second in terms of complexity
- Event driven architecture in Godot
- Reset the ball
- Increment score

### Ball -> Paddles

- Instead of overlapping, needs to bounce
- Probably not the most efficient method
- Vector Math
- {Code Snippet}
- Halving Y component -> normalising

## UI

- Used guide
- Separate Scene
- Not quite sure about the code
- {Snippet}
  
## Closing thoughts
